# `vtprotobuf-lite`, the Vitess Protocol Buffers compiler

This repository provides the `protoc-gen-go-lite-vtproto` plug-in for `protoc**, which is used by Vitess to generate optimized marshall & unmarshal code.

**This is a fork of the [upstream project] which works without reflection using the [protobuf-go-lite] package.**

[upstream project]: https://github.com/aperturerobotics/vtprotobuf-lite
[protobuf-go-lite]: https://github.com/aperturerobotics/protobuf-go-lite

The code generated by this compiler is based on the optimized code generated by [`gogo/protobuf`](https://github.com/gogo/protobuf), although this package is not a fork of the original `gogo` compiler, as it has been implemented to support the new ProtoBuf APIv2 packages.

## Available features

`vtprotobuf` is implemented as a helper plug-in that must be run **alongside** the upstream `protoc-gen-go` generator, as it generates fully-compatible auxiliary code to speed up (de)serialization of Protocol Buffer messages.

The following features can be generated:

- `size`: generates a `func (p *YourProto) SizeVT() int` helper that behaves identically to calling `proto.Size(p)` on the message, except the size calculation is fully unrolled and does not use reflection. This helper function can be used directly, and it'll also be used by the `marshal` codegen to ensure the destination buffer is properly sized before ProtoBuf objects are marshalled to it.

- `equal`: generates the following helper methods

    - `func (this *YourProto) EqualVT(that *YourProto) bool`: this function behaves almost identically to calling `proto.Equal(this, that)` on messages, except the equality calculation is fully unrolled and does not use reflection. This helper function can be used directly.

    - `func (this *YourProto) EqualMessageVT(thatMsg any) bool`: this function behaves like the above `this.EqualVT(that)`, but allows comparing against arbitrary proto messages. If `thatMsg` is not of type `*YourProto`, false is returned. The uniform signature provided by this method allows accessing this method via type assertions even if the message type is not known at compile time. This allows implementing a generic `func EqualVT(proto.Message, proto.Message) bool` without reflection.

- `marshal`: generates the following helper methods

    - `func (p *YourProto) MarshalVT() ([]byte, error)`: this function behaves identically to calling `proto.Marshal(p)`, except the actual marshalling has been fully unrolled and does not use reflection or allocate memory. This function simply allocates a properly sized buffer by calling `SizeVT` on the message and then uses `MarshalToSizedBufferVT` to marshal to it.

    - `func (p *YourProto) MarshalToVT(data []byte) (int, error)`: this function can be used to marshal a message to an existing buffer. The buffer must be large enough to hold the marshalled message, otherwise this function will panic. It returns the number of bytes marshalled. This function is useful e.g. when using memory pooling to re-use serialization buffers.

    - `func (p *YourProto) MarshalToSizedBufferVT(data []byte) (int, error)`: this function behaves like `MarshalTo` but expects that the input buffer has the exact size required to hold the message, otherwise it will panic.

- `marshal_strict`: generates the following helper methods

    - `func (p *YourProto) MarshalVTStrict() ([]byte, error)`: this function behaves like `MarshalVT`, except fields are marshalled in a strict order by field's numbers they were declared in .proto file.

    - `func (p *YourProto) MarshalToVTStrict(data []byte) (int, error)`: this function behaves like `MarshalToVT`, except fields are marshalled in a strict order by field's numbers they were declared in .proto file.

    - `func (p *YourProto) MarshalToSizedBufferVTStrict(data []byte) (int, error)`: this function behaves like `MarshalToSizedBufferVT`, except fields are marshalled in a strict order by field's numbers they were declared in .proto file.


- `unmarshal`: generates a `func (p *YourProto) UnmarshalVT(data []byte)` that behaves similarly to calling `proto.Unmarshal(data, p)` on the message, except the unmarshalling is performed by unrolled codegen without using reflection and allocating as little memory as possible. If the receiver `p` is **not** fully zeroed-out, the unmarshal call will actually behave like `proto.Merge(data, p)`. This is because the `proto.Unmarshal` in the ProtoBuf API is implemented by resetting the destination message and then calling `proto.Merge` on it. To ensure proper `Unmarshal` semantics, ensure you've called `proto.Reset` on your message before calling `UnmarshalVT`, or that your message has been newly allocated.

- `unmarshal_unsafe` generates a `func (p *YourProto) UnmarshalVTUnsafe(data []byte)` that behaves like `UnmarshalVT`, except it unsafely casts slices of data to `bytes` and `string` fields instead of copying them to newly allocated arrays, so that it performs less allocations. **Data received from the wire has to be left untouched for the lifetime of the message.** Otherwise, the message's `bytes` and `string` fields can be corrupted.

- `pool`: generates the following helper methods

    - `func (p *YourProto) ResetVT()`: this function behaves similarly to `proto.Reset(p)`, except it keeps as much memory as possible available on the message, so that further calls to `UnmarshalVT` on the same message will need to allocate less memory. This an API meant to be used with memory pools and does not need to be used directly.

    - `func (p *YourProto) ReturnToVTPool()`: this function returns message `p` to a local memory pool so it can be reused later. It clears the object properly with `ResetVT` before storing it on the pool. This method should only be used on messages that were obtained from a memory pool by calling `YourProtoFromVTPool`. **Using `p` after calling this method will lead to undefined behavior**.

    - `func YourProtoFromVTPool() *YourProto`: this function returns a `YourProto` message from a local memory pool, or allocates a new one if the pool is currently empty. The returned message is always empty and ready to be used (e.g. by calling `UnmarshalVT` on it). Once the message has been processed, it must be returned to the memory pool by calling `ReturnToVTPool()` on it. Returning the message to the pool is not mandatory (it does not leak memory), but if you don't return it, that defeats the whole point of memory pooling.

- `clone`: generates the following helper methods

    - `func (p *YourProto) CloneVT() *YourProto`: this function behaves similarly to calling `proto.Clone(p)` on the message, except the cloning is performed by unrolled codegen without using reflection. If the receiver `p` is `nil` a typed `nil` is returned.

    - `func (p *YourProto) CloneMessageVT() any`: this function behaves like the above `p.CloneVT()`, but provides a uniform signature in order to be accessible via type assertions even if the type is not known at compile time. This allows implementing a generic `func CloneMessageVT() any` without reflection. If the receiver `p` is `nil`, a typed `nil` pointer of the message type will be returned inside a `any` interface.

## Usage

1. Install `protoc-gen-go-lite-vtproto`:

    ```
    go install github.com/aperturerobotics/vtprotobuf-lite/cmd/protoc-gen-go-lite-vtproto@latest
    ```

2. Ensure your project is already using the ProtoBuf v2 API (i.e. `google.golang.org/protobuf`). The `vtprotobuf` compiler is not compatible with APIv1 generated code.

3. Update your `protoc` generator to use the new plug-in. Example from Vitess:

    ```
    for name in $(PROTO_SRC_NAMES); do \
        $(VTROOT)/bin/protoc \
        --go-lite_out=. --plugin protoc-gen-go-lite="${GOBIN}/protoc-gen-go-lite" \
        --go-lite-vtproto_out=. --plugin protoc-gen-go-lite-vtproto="${GOBIN}/protoc-gen-go-lite-vtproto" \
        --go-lite-vtproto_opt=features=marshal+unmarshal+size \
        proto/$${name}.proto; \
    done
    ```

    Note that the `vtproto` compiler runs like an auxiliary plug-in to the `protoc-gen-go-lite` in APIv2. You need to run it alongside the upstream generator, not as a replacement.

4. (Optional) Pass the features that you want to generate as `--go-vtproto_opt`. If no features are given, all the codegen steps will be performed.

5. (Removed) the pool feature has been removed.

6. (Optional) if you want to selectively compile the generate `vtprotobuf` files, the `--vtproto_opt=buildTag=<tag>` can be used.

    When using this option, the generated code will only be compiled in if a build tag is provided.

    It is recommended, but not required, to use `vtprotobuf` as the build tag if this is desired, especially if your project is imported by others.
    This will reduce the number of build tags a user will need to configure if they are importing multiple libraries following this pattern.

    When using this option, it is strongly recommended to make your code compile with and without the build tag.
    This can be done with type assertions before using `vtprotobuf` generated methods.

7. Compile the `.proto` files in your project. You should see `_vtproto.pb.go` files next to the `.pb.go` files that were already being generated.

8. (Optional) Switch your RPC framework to use the optimized helpers (see following sections)

## `vtprotobuf` package and well-known types

Your generated `_vtproto.pb.go` files will have a dependency on this Go package to access some helper functions as well as the optimized code for ProtoBuf [well-known types](https://protobuf.dev/reference/protobuf/google.protobuf/). `vtprotobuf` will detect these types embedded in your own Messages and generate optimized code to marshal and unmarshal them.

## Using the optimized code with RPC frameworks

The `protoc-gen-go-lite-vtproto` compiler does not overwrite any of the default marshalling or unmarshalling code for your ProtoBuf objects. Instead, it generates helper methods that can be called explicitly to opt-in to faster (de)serialization.

### Twirp

Twirp does not support customizing the Marshalling/Unmarshalling codec by default. In order to support `vtprotobuf`, you'll need to perform a search & replace on the generated Twirp files after running `protoc`. Here's an example:

```sh
for twirp in $${dir}/*.twirp.go; \
do \
  echo 'Updating' $${twirp}; \
  sed -i '' -e 's/respBytes, err := proto.Marshal(respContent)/respBytes, err := respContent.MarshalVT()/g' $${twirp}; \
  sed -i '' -e 's/if err = proto.Unmarshal(buf, reqContent); err != nil {/if err = reqContent.UnmarshalVT(buf); err != nil {/g' $${twirp}; \
done; \
```

### DRPC

To use `vtprotobuf` as a DRPC encoding, simply pass `github.com/aperturerobotics/vtprotobuf-lite/codec/drpc` as the `protolib` flag in your `protoc-gen-go-drpc` invocation.

Example:

```
protoc --go_out=. --go-vtproto_out=. --go-drpc_out=. --go-drpc_opt=protolib=github.com/aperturerobotics/vtprotobuf-lite/codec/drpc
```

## Integrating with [`buf`](http://github.com/bufbuild/buf)

`vtprotobuf` generation can be easily automated if your project's Protocol Buffers are managed with `buf`.

Simply install `protoc-gen-go-lite-vtproto` (see _Usage_ section) and add it as a plug-in to your `buf.gen.yaml` configuration:

```yaml
version: v1
managed:
  enabled: true
  # ...
plugins:
  - plugin: buf.build/protocolbuffers/go
    out: ./
    opt: paths=source_relative
  - plugin: go-vtproto
    out: ./
    opt: paths=source_relative
```

Running `buf generate` will now also include the `vtprotobuf` optimized helpers.
